hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a couple
of questions what does Israel's war on
Gaza say about US foreign policy and
what are the long-term consequences for
the region and the world let's get to
the bottom
line October 7th and its aftermath will
definitely go down in history as a
turning point for the Middle East
hamas's attack and Israel's allout war
on Gaza have forced countries around the
world to rethink their priorities for
Israel the plans to leaf frog over the
Palestinians and integrate itself into
the region are now on hold for the US
its plans to Pivot to Asia to focus on
China and avoid getting dragged back
into the Middle East are also gone with
the wi so what are the far-reaching
implications of the Gaza War not only
for the Palestinians and Israelis and
what happens next today I'm talking with
John alterman the director of the Middle
East program at the center for strategic
and International Studies John thank you
so much for joining us today thank you
let me just start out you written a very
powerful ful interesting article I want
to have everyone go look at it it's on
the csis website called Israel could
lose the implication is Hamas could win
so tell us how Hamas could win hamas's
goal is not to defeat Israel on the
battlefield in any near term hamas's
goal is to arrest Israel's integration
in the world Israel's integration into
the Middle East to make Israel more
isolated uh to continue to put Israelis
Under Pressure to to over the long
term create a situation where
Palestinians are united around Hamas the
Palestinian Authority collapses and
Hamas can bring Regional support other
support to eventually conquer Jerusalem
um what they did on October 7th was was
much more successful than they ever
thought but I think we we have to
consider just how long the high from
that is likely to last Egypt broke
through the the supposedly impregnable
bar Lev line in
1973 they used water cannons to break
through a sand burn that the Israelis
thought the Egyptians never could cross
recaptured the Sinai
briefly the Egyptians pushed back over
I'm sorry the Israelis pushed back over
over and were 100 km outside of Cairo
and yet the Egyptian Military continues
50 years later to treat 1973 as their
great
achievement Armed Forces Day is O is
October 6th every year in Egypt for 50
years break merely breaking through a
defense was was a victory Hamas broke
through the impenetrable Israeli fence
in 29
places with using techniques the
Israelis never Conta contemplated the
Israelis thought we have this figured
out we have it figured out
technologically we have Hamas figured
out we know how to play with work
permits we know how to do all these
things Palestine is not on anybody's
radar
screen we have one and we're going to be
doing not only the Abraham records will
do things with the Saudis we're doing
things with the Indians we're in a
different place and hamas's argument is
you're not going to be able to do that
we're going to drag you right back to
this conflict we're going to tear you
apart from all of these alliances you've
been building for the last 50 years and
you will suffer as we suffer and we're
ultimately going to win because we have
more resolved than you do that's what
Hamas wants to do they changed the the
the parameters of this conflict and
Israel is committed to eradicating Hamas
but it's not really
clear what that means or how you do that
I think when you kind of look at the
question of eliminating Hamas and almost
everyone I would say in the Western
World kind of agrees with that after the
horror of what they saw on October 7th
everybody all the governments in the
Arab world want to eliminate
Hamas of only a small number because
here you have an armed group that
Embraces political Islam that's backed
by the Iranians right and for virtually
all of the Arab governments that makes
them anathema they would love to see
Hamas gone but I think at the same time
when you look at the horror of what they
Unleashed on October 7th and the
Subterranean tectonics that of of
essentially Injustice and keeping a
population in a vice in a very very high
pressure Vice for a long time some in
some places of the world but I would
also say the West Bank and among a lot
of Palestinians what Hamas did
nonetheless feels good to them feels
legitimate to them is that a problem
because if this becomes an IDE ideology
that's deeper how do you separate Hamas
from Palestine and in part that's what
uh Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu is
saying is he's in a sense saying all
Palestinians are Hamas
right um so you know there's an argument
in Israel and I think there's some
validity to it that that Netanyahu
wanted to have both Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority he wanted Hamas to
to to demonstrate that you couldn't make
peace with the Palestinians but he
wanted a relatively uh uh flexible
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank
to deal with and and sort of keep both
both tracks going and say well I can't
really make a Palestinian do because the
Palestinians themselves aren't United
um I think to my
mind the the brutality of Hamas
delegitimizes the movement in a really
profound way I don't think there's an
excuse for it I don't I I I you know I
spoke to to somebody from my podcast uh
earlier this week a podcast called Babel
translating in the Middle East and I
spoke to somebody who grew up in Gaza
who will tell you all about the horrors
of Gaza it doesn't
justify what Hamas did I think some of
the guys were high on
Capon it's all kinds of issues involving
what so are are Gins angry at what Hamas
did now for triggering this hell and the
destruction of their city and some say
as far as I can tell some
say just that the to show that we won't
be trampled that we have dignity that we
can fight back is important one of the
important things though and this guy who
I spoke to um KH SE was talking
about when he was in Gaza he never met
in Israeli the only Israeli he ever saw
was in a jet flying overhead dropping
bombs that Gins systematically never see
Israelis and so there's a whole world
inside Gaza and Hamas since it took
power in in in Gaza uh in 2005 has has
been creating its own reality teaching
its own narrative about Israel its own
its own theology about what Society
should be like also
distorting of of gazen
society where do you see John the big
Powers around this crisis Saudi Arabia
Iran the United States Egypt because it
seems to me when you kind of look at
this one of the you know truth you've
been talking about for decades is you
can't just ignore this conflict they
will come screaming back and get you and
the Abraham Accords were sort of as you
wrote uh kind of trying to ignore the
Palestine equation palestine's come
right back but it it but it seems to me
that this conflict could go a number of
directions that either enhance or trct
from Big Powers around the conflict how
do you see the geopolitical context of
this crisis so let let me start with
sort of Russia and China I think China
has had deepening relations with Israel
for a long time China without question
has decided we're going to play the
global South card we're going to play
the the Injustice card uh China is very
sympathetic to the Palestinian narrative
and playing this as China plays many of
its International engagements by
thinking how does this affect the United
States if we can get an edge over the
United States with with audiences we
care about let's play it that way and I
think that's what China is doing uh but
I do think that China expects and will
push to be included in whenever peace
deal comes about they're looking for
Prestige they're looking for people to
recognize China's role so I think
they'll be subtly Pro Palestinian not
necessarily pramas but which is strange
in a way because what about China and
sjan what about China and yeah uh you
know I mean what about its populations
that it has in advice and and
realistically Chinese diplomats come to
Middle Eastern states and they say do
not talk about it and they say
okay and and they and they say quiet the
clerks down ab and they do so China is
an
interesting uh demonstration case for
just how
much power Middle Eastern governments
have over both public opinion and over
um clerical opinion about things in the
world they've often said oh we can't do
that you know it's we have we have our
public opinion when they want to steer
it they do and they certainly steer it
on on Shen Jang um so I think China is
is going to capitalize they want to use
this as a way to be recognized as a
great power without doing the kinds of
things that a great power would be
expected to do right Russia once again a
bottom feeder they look at fragile
places they look for small advantages I
don't think they're playing any any
constructive role here um Saudi
Arabia realistically the government is
trying to Tamp down some of the pro
Palestinian uh sentiment they're trying
to guide it when I look at Saudi papers
the Saudi papers are not over the moon
hostile to Israel that they're a little
more deliberate I think my understanding
is their effort is that costing Saudi
leadership anything with their own Arab
Street I mean in a way of course the
Saudis have long been opponents of the
Muslim Brotherhood you know Hamas is
looked at as a an appendage or you know
fellow traveler with the Muslim
Brotherhood so you can understand that
but if your choice and partnership is
that oh we're going to become pro-israel
over um Arabs is that a problem for them
well they're not pro Israel I think
their their argument is let's find a
let's find a way to be sort of pro
Palestinian they've halted things with
Israel I think that're they're
not they've told people on the one hand
we're not ready to talk about postc
conflict environment helping the PA and
all those kinds of things uh but they've
also told some Americans who've been in
the kingdom are strategic orientation
toward uh having some sort of
understanding with Israel
remains in place it's just suspended for
now the amadis as well I think trying to
use ways to to to Tamp down some of the
sentiment without squashing it right um
you know and both Saudi Arabia and and
the UAE are uh pretty sophisticated
pretty sophisticated in the way they uh
engage with social media and public
sentiment and I think they're trying to
keep it within boundaries
Egypt and Jordan are two places that
have I think a lot more uh public anger
and probably the the government is less
sophisticated in ways to to shape it I
think they are worried Egypt has a big
role to play you know Jordan has this
historic connection with Palestine I
interview the the Jordanian foreign
minister um a couple of weeks ago at
csis
he almost never used the word Hamas and
would only do it when directly pressed
it was all about Palestine and his point
was we have to use this as a way to push
toward two-state solution I think
ultimately Egypt is going to have to be
the Keystone of whatever happens next in
Gaza in terms of logistics for
reconstruction in terms of governance
the Egyptians have their tentacles into
Gaza through their their link their
intelligence links things that dat back
to when they controlled Gaza until
1967 um but Egypt is a country with a
whole bunch of
problems and uh financial and otherwise
and uh I think Egypt is is going to be
careful what it does is going to be
trying to get things but also serve its
National interest let me just say one
more
thing what I think a lot of this all
highlights
is the the sustained centrality of the
United
States um there is clearly no country or
collection of countries that can begin
to do what the United States can do Tony
blinken's been running around the world
I think he's been trying to to bridge an
increasingly large gap between the
Israelis and and the rest of the world
certainly between the Israelis and the
Arab I mean how would you greatest I
mean I see him running all around the
world too and trying it and I see him
not getting as much traction as I would
have thought the Secretary of state of
the president United States getting the
second side of it is where the American
people do they think that this Global
engagement is somehow paying off for
them or they getting exhausted by it I
am amazed at just how much attention
sustained attention the Gaza war is
attracting the conventional wisdom in
the Middle East among other places was
that the world has has washed its hands
of this young people especially they're
interested in entertainment they're
interested in in jobs that you know Arab
youth are are over Palestine that's an
old issue
um and I think this is one of a tiny
number of issues in the world that can
get billions of people exercised you
know frankly another issue and it's it's
strange a strange parallel I think LGBT
issues are another issue that get
billions of people exercised I'm not
sure there's another those are the only
two I can think of they're not similar
at all but I think they they somehow
speak deeply to something it's sort of
ingrained in people it it elicits this
emotional reaction I'm frankly
surprised because everything I have been
hearing in the Middle East for more than
years on every side of this equation on
the Israeli side on the Arab
side Gulf Arabs levantine Arabs you know
were it's there but it's not it's not a
motivating issue um and I think in
Americans too it's Americans have gotten
interested whether this translates to
American interest in foreign policy
American interest in the
world whether people think about the US
role in the world I'm having a much
harder
time understanding that I can't tell you
I keep running across Americans who tell
me this is a three 3,000 year old
problem it's not a 3,000 year old
problem uh you know it's it's a it's a a
relative well to that point I used to
talk to Senator George Mitchell who was
our on Envoy on this got so frustrated
and he said his response was hey call us
in 400 years when you get over these
religious you know fanatic Wars but you
know and and he was basically saying
there's nothing that can be done I know
you don't share that view but this is a
problem of nationalisms right and
nationalism is a relatively recent
phenomenon in the world um the the issue
of of Jewish immigration to Palestine is
is quite recent obviously um uh
influenced by by the
Holocaust uh but this is a relatively
recent problem which I think has no
perfect solution but certainly ways to
improve the situation um again whether
whether
Americans
say they've been fighting for 3,000
years will'll be fighting in around
3,000 I don't care or whether Americans
say you
know this does affect our security or
whether Americans say the US can do
things that nobody else can do I don't
know where where people come out on this
I don't think the president knows but I
don't think the president is thinking in
those terms and certainly one of the
interesting things and you know this
much better than I do I think um within
the
government the the the position Joe
Biden is taking is a position that used
to be the standard US Government
position for decades right very
conventional and for he's been you know
in the 50 years ago he joined the Senate
this was a sort of mainstream position
it's not a mainstream position anymore
you have an increasing number of younger
and more diverse government employees
who say what's happening in my name um I
don't know where that breaks I think
certainly in the US communities of color
and younger people are in a very
different position from where the
president is how that
shapes us for this begs the question of
what happens after you have Tony blinkin
saying Gaza cannot be occupied again
Gaza cannot be shrunk again you have
prime minister Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu coming out and saying you know
we're going to determine every security
aspect uh of the future of Gaza what is
as you begin looking at a place where
the schools have been bombed the roads
have been bombed the infrastructure has
been bombed I mean what's going to
happen to this 140 square miles which
you wrote so eloquently about afterward
which is you twice the size of the
District of Columbia 2.3 3 million
people um there will have to be
reconstruction but
frankly people don't want to reconstruct
things only have Israelis bomb them
again I mean there's going to have to be
some sort of understanding with the
Israelis again this is why I think there
needs to be an Arab role to partly to do
some financing but part and partly to do
some policing and partly do some
governance support and partly to
legitimate that this is not a foreign
imposed
solution but an Arab solution there's
going to have to be a role for the
Palestinian Authority but the
Palestinian Authority can't effectively
govern the West Bank it can't take over
a hostile conflict affected region in
Gaza right now there's going to have to
be a lot of people coming together the
US can't do it but the us can help
coordinate again this is where I think
we're we're going to see this sort of
this stained unique ability of the
United States to do these kinds of hard
things I think that there's going to be
a whole set of transitions in Israel I
think there's going to be a political
transition a lot of the people who
responsible for security before October
7th are going to be sacked there's going
to be commissions of inquiry looking at
all the failures that went into it I
think Beni Netanyahu is not going to be
the Prime Minister when all the dust
settles I'm not sure who will be
I would like to
think that uh you're going to have an
Israeli government that says we have to
rethink how we're approaching this uh
but I'll tell you when I speak to both
Israelis and
Palestinians people tell me after what
we've seen the last
month the people who are arguing for
coexistence haven't been empowered by
the last month of hostility the people
who argue for coexistence are both both
sides right are saying look at who these
people really are right and so we have a
we all have a journey ahead of us let me
just ask you finally did Joe Biden make
a big strategic mistake when he came in
he sort of largely ignored uh the
Palestinian side of this he said we're
going to focus on Asia the pivot to Asia
at the time which you know hadn't
anticipated what had happened with
Ukraine but you know I think more deeply
you'd seen the Trump Administration lay
the groundwork for the Abraham cords you
saw Jared Kushner run this and it
largely ignored the pales question just
sort of shoved it to the side and a lot
of people thought of all people Joe
Biden former chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee a kind of
rival if you will to uh Israeli Prime
Minister Netanyahu over time they didn't
like each other that he would come in
and reset things in a way that would
include a horizon for Israel and
Palestine again and a lot of people
think that was an opportunity Miss so
did Joe Biden make a mistake at the
beginning of his administration that in
part contributed to this environment
I don't think so
because you can't make a peace
agreement unless both sides feel some
urgency and necessity to make a
deal when Joe Biden came in neither side
felt either an urgency or necessity to
make an agreement Mahmud Abbas wasn't
interested bin Netanyahu wasn't
interested and I think you know the US
can can sort of push and push and push
should try
to but this
conditions did not lead either side to
say this is really
unacceptable and so I think you try to
prevent doors from closing certainly
nobody wanted a a a catastrophe like
October 7th to happen um but if you
don't have Partners you know one of the
things that that uh us officials have
said a lot in the past is the US can't
want want peace more than the parties
themselves and I just don't think it was
a it was a good environment I think now
people do see the possibility of
environment but there's a lot of
building that's going to have to go on
to get there and part of it is you have
a profound leadership vacuum on both the
Palestinian and Israeli side and we're
going to have to go through political
transitions on both the Palestinian and
Israeli side to have an agreement
working toward agreement can help be
part of that
process but but there are no leaders now
maybe this conflict will help create
some leaders who can take us to a better
place is Hamas going to survive in this
future plan or do you think Hamas will
be decimated I think the Flames of Hamas
will go away the Embers of Hamas will
remain and the only way to extinguish
the Embers is to have an
alternative um an alternative that gives
dignity and some self of of some sense
of self-determination to Palestinians
and Gaza and the Israelis have up to now
been very reluctant to do that I think
it's in their profound interest to to
change that view well John alterman BF
brazinski chair in Global Security and
geost strategy at the center for
strategic and International Studies here
in Washington thank you so much for
sharing your thoughts with us today
thank you Steve so what's the bottom
line the battle over a Homeland has been
going on for a century and with the
support of the West Israel has been the
dominant power setting the agenda and
dictating the terms of Engagement now
the world needs to figure out a path
where Israel feels secure and the
Palestinians well they need something to
look forward to that means Nations
around the world in the Middle East Asia
Europe and of course the United States
are making commitments for the so-called
day after what we are seeing unfold now
with the deaths of so many who do not
deserve their lives being snuffed out
won't just matter to Israelis and
Palestinians but will have major
long-term consequences for America's
place in the world as well and that's
the bottom
[Music]
line